The Project Gutenberg eBook, Country Life in the Poetry of John Clare, by
Mildred M. Coen


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Country Life in the Poetry of John Clare


Author: Mildred M. Coen



Release Date: January 1, 2017  [eBook #53860]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COUNTRY LIFE IN THE POETRY OF JOHN
CLARE***


Transcribed from the 1922 University of Illinois edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                 COUNTRY LIFE IN THE POETRY OF JOHN CLARE


                                    BY

                             MILDRED M. COEN

                                * * * * *

                                  THESIS
                                 FOR THE
                        DEGREE OF BACHELOR OF ARTS
                                    IN
                                 ENGLISH

                                * * * * *

                   COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS AND SCIENCES
                          UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

                                   1922




UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS


                                                        _January_ 23, 1922

   THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE THESIS PREPARED UNDER MY SUPERVISION BY

                            _Mildred M. Coen_

           ENTITLED _Country Life In The Poetry of John Clare_

  IS APPROVED BY ME AS FULFILLING THIS PART OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
                                DEGREE OF

                            _Bachelor of Arts_

                        _Clarence Valentine Boyer_

                                                      Instructor in Charge

APPROVED [Picture: Unreadable signature]

                                           HEAD OF DEPARTMENT OF _English_




Table of Contents

                                                                  PAGE
1. Part I        Economic Conditions in the Time of John             1
                 Clare
2. Part II       The Life of John Clare                              7
3. Part III      Country Life in the Poetry of John Clare           14
4. Bibliography                                                     25



PART I
Economic Conditions in the Time of Clare


About forty years before the birth of the Poet Clare, (1793) there began
in England a land revolution which by the end of the eighteenth century
pauperized a great part of the rural population.  Up until 1750 fully
half of the land of England was worked in “common”, or in accordance with
what was known as the open field system.  This open field system means
that there were special fields set aside for plow land.  These fields
were divided into very small strips which were alternately cultivated and
left unplowed.  Besides this plow land, there was a definite area of
grazing land, known as the commons.  With the coming of enclosures this
open field system was abolished.  (By the term ‘enclosure’ is meant that
all the strips of any one man scattered throughout the holdings of the
village were given to him in equivalent in a single, consolidated
acreage, which he had to fence, ditch, etc.  Or again, the term applies
to a large district, as very frequently the commons, that was fenced in
for the wealthy landowner’s sheep-pens.)

An enclosure began with a private bill introduced into Parliament—often
by a wealthy landlord.  This bill, showing the advantages of enclosing,
was sent to a committee, whose leader or chairman might have been the
selfsame landlord who had proposed the bill.  After being considered and
passed upon by the house of lords, which was in turn composed of wealthy
landowners only, the bill was put into the hands of a commission to be
executed.  Such a commission, perhaps headed by the nobleman wanting the
enclosure, descended upon the district and distributed the land according
to their wishes.

Enclosures no doubt increased the national wealth immensely in the long
run.  Of course, no modern system of farming could survive in which an
acre was divided into ten or more strips each with a different crop and
different owner.  And modern methods were just then being introduced into
England, and were finding an obstacle in the old system that was almost
identical with the Anglo-Saxon system of a thousand years earlier.  But
the change was too rapid and altered the character of the national life
of England to such a degree that it wrought untold hardships for more
than half a century.  The people of the villages were robbed of the
barest means of making a living.  Just as today the small manufacture has
no chance against the big one in his line, so then the small landowner
could not compete against the wealthy ones, especially since new and
expensive machinery and fertilizers were becoming more and more
essential.  The wealthy landowners improved their estates so that they
might raise the rent and make a profit that could be compared to the
profit made by the fast-rising merchant aristocracy.  The rent on these
improved farms was so high that the small farmer had to give up farming
altogether.  The commons were enclosed and in a majority of the cases
went to the wealthy landowners who raised a better grade of sheep with
heavier wool on the pasturage thus afforded: but the small farmer and in
fact all the rest of the agricultural population did not have a place to
graze a cow.  The small sum of money given them for the loss of their
rights in grazing stock on the commons and gathering wood from the waste,
was soon spent for the bare necessities of living; and when this was
spent, the economic independence of the laboring population was gone.

The enclosures were thus fatal to three classes of the rural population:
the small farmer, who had at most thirty acres; the cotter or cottager,
who had perhaps five; and the laborer who had less than that or none.
The process of enclosing their allottments after the consolidation
mentioned, was so expensive that it could not be borne except by a man
with some capital to start on.  The man who was called upon by the
enclosing committee to promptly ditch and fence his little land, and who
could not do so, was compelled to sell at whatever price he could get.
The small farmer of thirty acres might possibly have borne this expense
but he received no adequate recompense for his rights of common; and such
advantages as he received from the consolidation of his thirty acres
could not make amends for the loss of common rights.  For, without
pasture he could not keep sheep; with no sheep he could not fertilize his
land; without fertilizer the land soon wore out.  The small farmer then
could emigrate to America, or go to an industrial town, or become a day
laborer.  Thus it was that a small, independent farmer in a few years
became a laborer and in another few years was perhaps thrown upon parish
relief.

The effect upon the cottager can best be described by saying that before
the enclosures he was a laborer with land; and after the enclosure he was
a laborer without land.  For the inability to fence and ditch his
holdings operated even more sternly in his case than in that of the small
farmer.  A great part of the land, moreover, that was enclosed was turned
to pasture by the large owners, and the laborers formerly employed on it
were discharged.  Where fifteen men farmed, one man herded.  The cottager
and the laborer were thus made dependent on wages alone at a time when
competition for work was beating wages down to a starvation level.  The
squatter was a poor alien on the land.  He settled on the waste, built a
cottage, and got together a few geese, perhaps a cow and a horse; and
began to cultivate the land.  With the coming of the enclosure he lost
his common right; and thus uprooted he could start on a wandering journey
of beggary.

Perhaps we can get an idea of the misery and universal wretchedness of
the rural population if we quote a few words from an eye-witness,
Cobbett, in his PARISH REGISTER:

    “Their dwellings are little better than pig-beds; and the looks would
    indicate that their food is not nearly the equal of that of a nig.
    The wretched hovels are stuck upon little plots of ground by the
    road-side where the space was wider than the road demanded.  . . .
    Yesterday morning was a sharp frost; and this had set the poor
    creatures digging up their little plots of potatoes.  In my whole
    life I never saw such wretchedness, not even among the plantation
    negroes.”

The laborer, to keep from starving, often turned to poaching and petty
thievery.  But the noblemen had their parks enclosed against trespassers.
Spring-guns were set up on the estates.  Poaching offenses were made
punishable by death, or at the least by transportation to Australia.  The
poor might seek charity from the parish pauper work-house.  Or they might
starve.

Many reforms to better these conditions were proposed, mainly because the
English Aristocracy had just seen in a sister nation what a desperate
proletariat could do if pushed to extremes of misery.  The reform that
was adopted goes under the name of _The Speenhamland System_.  In brief,
it provided that if a laborer did not receive a certain minimum wage
(which was set on a sliding scale to correspond to the price of wheat),
he was to be given from the parish relief to make up the set amount.
Nothing was done to force the employer to pay this minimum wage; and
since he could depend upon the parish having to pay it, he seldom did
give the laborer a living wage.  The result was that those who were not
already paupers speedily became so.  The scheme was the culmination of a
series of strokes that pauperized an already impoverished nation.

The laborer was separated from the land by the enclosures in a greater
degree than can be readily realized.  Before the industrial and agrarian
revolutions, Arthur Young estimated that out of a population of
8,500,000, the agricultural portion was 2,800,000, or one-fourth of the
total number.  In the second decade of the nineteenth century the total
number engaged of farms and dairies was 1,300,000: that is not half the
actual number engaged in the century before; while the proportion had
sunk from one person in four to one in twenty-five.

The main features of this land change were; the open field system was
abolished; the plow and grazing lands were enclosed; small farms were
consolidated into larger ones; new methods and machinery were introduced;
and the laborer was separated from the land.  It was in this change of
rural conditions that the poet John Clare was born and reared—in
Northamptonshire, which was a purely agricultural district and felt the
misery and universal pauperization that went with the agrarian
revolution.




PART II
The Life Of John Clare (1793–1864)


John Clare was horn in the little village of Helpstone in
Northamptonshire, in 1793.  His family, one of the poorest in the
village, was enrolled in the parish pauper list.  When the poet was
seven, his father by the greatest privations sent him to a certain
“Dame-School”; but the money could not be spared to keep him there very
long, and John was hired out to tend the geese and sheep on the commons.
He saved up his few pennies during the next two or three years; and
again, at the age of ten, went to school for a few months.  This was all
the formal education that the poet received; for at twelve he was already
working regularly in the fields.  With hardly strength enough for the
slightest labor, so small and weak-armed that his father made him a
special flail to thresh with, he must have endured sufferings of body and
spirit those years.

When he was thirteen, the reading of Thomson’s “Seasons” led him to
believe that he was a poet himself.  He had already showed a poetic
temperament: as a very young child he had set out one day to walk towards
the horizon, that he might touch it.  As he grew older he was unusually
credulous of supernatural things, fancying all kinds of ghosts and
goblins in the swamps ready to attack him.  Then, when he read the
“Seasons”, he scribbled down on a piece of paper the lines which were
afterwards known as “The Morning Walk.”  He wrote other verses on scraps
of paper which he would stuff into a hole in the wall.  When his mother
would find them, she used them for lighting the fires.  The poet showed
some of his verses to a Mr. Thomas Porter living near Helpstone, and was
advised to learn grammar.  The attempt to do this kept him from writing
any more poems for several years.

During these years, Clare engaged in various forms of day labor to
support himself.  For a time he worked among the gardeners in Burghley
Park, where he acquired the habit of carousing and drinking.  He ran away
for a few months but after wandering about, went back home to work on a
farm.  Later he found work at a lime-kiln; where, though the work was
hard, he found time to write half a dozen poems in the course of a day.
It was at this time, in 1817, that he met Martha Turner, the “Patty” of
some of his poems, whom he married after many hesitations and
differences.

Between the meeting with Patty and his marriage, three years later, Clare
became almost a beggar, and put down his name, as his father did, on the
pauper list, claiming relief from the parish.  The money he had saved
when he worked at the line-kiln had been spent on the printing of a
hundred copies of a prospectus, which he called: “Proposals for
Publishing by Subscriptions a Collection of Original Trifles on
Miscellaneous Subjects, Religious and Moral, in Verse, by John Clare of
Helpstone.”  He intended to raise money on this subscription and get
married.  As the title might indicate, only seven subscribers could be
found; and it seemed as if the poems would never be printed.  But by good
luck they fell into the hands of a Stamford bookseller called Drury, who
sent them to London to his relative, Mr. Taylor, a prominent printer.
Taylor saw the value of the poems, and announced them in the first issue
of his new “London Magazine”.  On January 16, 1820, he published the
“Poems Descriptive of Rural Life, and Scenery, by John Clare, a
Northamptonshire Peasant.”  He attached an introduction that was almost
an appeal to charity.

The success of the poems was immediate.  Praise came from the Quarterly
Review that had attacked Keats.  Madame Vestris recited some of the poems
at Covent Gardens; Rossini set one of them to music.  The poet was taken
to London under the guidance of his editor, Mr. Taylor, who took him to
theatres and dinner parties.  There, because of his naive rusticity in
dress, manner, and speech, he became as popular as his rural verses.  At
his first visit, he gained the friendship of two life-long friends, Lord
Radstock and Mrs. Emmerson.  Subscriptions were raised; the money was
invested for him; and Clare found himself with an income of forty-five
pounds a year.

On that amount the poet thought he could live without working.  In the
day he would wander about the commons writing poems; at night he sat in
the inn-parlors receiving his admirers.  In 1821 he brought out another
book, “The Village Minstrel.”  Gilchrist and Taylor had fought the
battles of the first volume; but Gilchrist at this time was busily
engaged in a literary battle between the editors of Pope and Byron and
the Quarterly Review.  This second volume of Clare’s was left neglected.
The next year he made a second trip to London.  The poet stayed there
long enough to get acquainted with the taverns and gay theatres, and to
fall in love with an actress and the young wife of a friend.  He met
Gifford and Murray, and supped with Lamb.

The freedom and gaiety of London had done Clare no good when he came back
to Helpstone; the trip had merely made him discontented and lonely.
However, he wrote verses copiously and tried to make better bargains in
selling them.  He was not successful at this, and the little money he had
soon dwindled away.  Stinting himself in food that his ever increasing
family and old parents might have enough to eat, he became seriously ill.
He went to London again, and receiving medical aid, became better
rapidly.

On this visit, he met all the leading literary men as they gathered for
dinner parties at the home of the editor, Taylor.  Mr. Martin, Clare’s
biographer, gives the poet’s naive reaction to the “Lions” on the times.
Like a child he sat spell-bound listening to their talk, while he felt
keenly a disappointment that they were not as he had imagined them in his
day-dreams.  At such parties he met Hazlitt, Reynolds, Coleridge, Lamb,
Cary, the translator of Dante, and many others notables.

As soon as he was strong enough and had returned to Helpstone, he got a
job digging ditches and draining marshes; but he was too weak to do the
work.  Sickness, poverty, cares, came faster and faster.  His thoughts
naturally came to him in verse; but the circumstances of his life
prevented him from developing to the extent he otherwise might.
Sometimes his poverty and his cares, sometimes drink, sometimes
starvation, prevented him from writing at all.  Out under the open sky he
felt free.  “There was a favorite spot where he delighted to sit, and
where the hallowed vein of poetry flowed freely.  This spot was the
hollow oak on the border of Helpstone heath, called Lea Close Oak.  Few
human beings ever came to this place; inside this oak the poet used to
sit for hours in silent meditations, forgetting everything about him and
unmindful of the waning day and the mantle of darkness falling over the
earth.”  (Martin’s “Life of John Clare.”)

A few years of prosperity relieved the ever-oppressed, poverty-cramped
life of the poet.  During these few years there was scarcely a wish left
unfulfilled, save the one of wanting a strip of earth and to be king of
his own land.  A poor crop and more sickness brought him back into the
dire want of his former years.  The Earl Fitzwilliam gave him a few acres
of land and a small cottage; but the change from the spot where he had
always lived was more than he could bear, and signs of approaching
insanity became more noticeable.  The Earl proposed to send him to an
asylum, since it was decided that the poet had lost his mind.  Mr. Taylor
with some interested friends arranged to send him to a private asylum
managed by a Dr. Allen, at High Bridge.  Homesickness for his wife and
children made him run away, after he had been at High Bridge for four
years, treated with the utmost kindness.  His experiences on this
journey, as described afterwards in a letter, were of the most pathetic
kind.  For ninety hours he had nothing to eat, save a few tobacco crumbs
he had found in his pocket and the green grass by the roadside.  Dying on
the road from hunger, with bruised and bleeding feet, he was picked up on
the roadside by his wife.  Two county physicians came and signed the
certificate that was to shut him up in the Northamptonshire Insane Asylum
for the remaining twenty-two years of his life.

At this place Clare was treated with the utmost respect.  The officials
placed him in a ward with the private patients, paying honor to him as
well as to themselves by recognizing the poet in the pauper.  In a recess
in one of the big windows, he spent the greater part of the years,
writing and thinking.  When he became very weak and infirm, he was
wheeled about in the gardens.  On Friday May 20, 1864 he died.  The
superintendent of the asylum wrote to the Earl Fitzwilliam for the small
sum necessary to carry out the wish of the poet that he be buried in his
native soil.  The Earl refused; but some kind friends raised the sum.
Clare now lies under a broad sycamore tree in the little cemetery of
Helpstone, “with nothing above but the green grass and the eternal vault
of heaven.”




PART III
Country Life in the Poetry of John Clare


Although John Clare was a peasant suffering from poverty all his life,
his poetry was not written with a propagandistic but with an artistic
purpose.  The literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
dealing with country life was either artistic or social in purpose.
Ebenezer Elliott, living at the sane time as Clare, wrote poems with a
social purpose—for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and the lowering of the
import duties on raw material.  Although Elliott was actually benefitted
by the Corn Laws, yet he wrote against them most bitterly.  John Clare,
on the other hand, impoverished all his life by the Corn Laws and other
similar measures, wrote nothing dealing with a change in the agricultural
situation.  Both writers are to be praised for their honesty, for their
ability to detach themselves from immediate personal interests, and for
their fidelity to their artistic and social purposes.

The poems of Clare may be divided into three classes: the Love Poems, the
Nature Poems, and the Poems dealing with social life.  In all the poet’s
writings he is dominated by an artistic purpose rather than by a desire
to reform or change conditions.  We should expect this to be so in the
Love Poems, which form the bulk of his work.  Yet, we may learn something
of the country life from these poems, if we take them, written by a
peasant as they are, to be typical of the sentiments felt by all the
rural laborers.  In spite of the material hardships and privations, there
is a simplicity and sweetness in the peasant’s love, an inner life of
tender emotions and warmth of feeling, that is in stark contrast with
external hardships.  Clare, in the love poems, expresses these sentiments
of the peasant.  The poem best illustrating the simple love is one
entitled, “My Love, thou art a Nosegay Sweet.”—

    And when, my Nosegay, thou shalt die,
    And heaven’s flower shall prove thee;
    My hopes shall follow to the sky,
    And everlasting love thee.

The ballad entitled “William and Mary,” {15} in which two rural swains
are talking of their sweethearts, shows an elevated emotion and respect
for the objects of their love, that is deep felt and natural.

    I strive to please her morning, noon, and night.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    For her in harvest when the nuts are brown,
    I take my crook to pull the branches down.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    The garland and the wreath for her I bind
    Compos’d of all the fairest flowers I find.

And finally, a few lines showing the simplicity of the peasant’s imagery
and comparisons.—

    ’Tis Spring, my Love, ’tis Spring,
    And the birds begin to sing;
    If it were winter, left alone with you,
    Your bonny form and face,
    Would make a Summer place,
    And be the fairest flower that ever grew.

Besides the sweet and simple love-life of the peasants, the poet
expresses their thoughts about the beauties of nature.  Nature must have
afforded delights that did much to make up for the poverty of the
peasant’s lack of material comfort.  Clare expresses these delights of
the inarticulate peasants when he describes their sentiments, as well as
the beauties of their native scenes.

    O Native endearments!  I would not forsake thee,
    I would not forsake thee for sweetest of scenes.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    Your skies may be gloomy, and misty your mornings,
    Your flat swampy vallies unwholesome may be;
    Still, refuse of nature without her adornings,
    Thou art dear as this heart in my bosom to me.

The poet finds beauty in the common, ordinary, natural objects of the low
fen and the marshy country of his birth.  But in these scenes he saw only
the less gloomy and oppressive aspects.  The commons may have been brown
and barren, but Clare remembers them when they were green and dotted with
wild flowers.  He wrote with fancy, feeling, and reflection about these
simple objects of nature.  In his fancy he lived the life of insects,
which to many are simply annoyances, but which to him are fairies, with
colored hoods and burnished wings, disguised in a sort of splendid
masquerade, rocked to sleep in the smooth velvet of the hedge-rose, or
slumbering like princes in the heath’s purple hood, secure from rain,
from dropping dews, in their beds and painted walls.  A jolly and royal
life this seems, this life of a hand of play-fellows mocking the sunshine
with their glittering wings, or drinking golden wine and metheglin from
the cup of the honey flower.  In a reflective mood, he sees into the
eternal mysteries of nature, beneath the forms and symbols of outward
appearances.  Cowslips of golden blooms will come and go as fresh two
thousand years from now as they are today.  Brooks, bees, birds, from age
to age, these will sing when all the ambitious things of earth have
passed away.

There are two characteristics in the nature poems of Clare: truth in the
painting of the objects, and tenderness in his sentiments toward them.
The poet is both truthful and tender when he paints a bird’s nest, a nest
often seen but never disturbed.  The nest of the pettichaps, close to the
rut-galled wagon-road, so snugly contrived, although without a clump of
grass to keep it warm or a shielding thistle spreading its spear in
protection, is built like an oven. . . .

    Scarcely admitting two fingers in,
    Hard to discern the bird’s snug entrance win:
    ’Tis lined with feathers warm as silken stole,
    Softer than seats of down for painless ease,
    And full of eggs, scarce bigger e’en than peas;
    Here’s one that’s delicate, with spots so small
    As dust, and of a faint and pinky red;
    Well, let them be, and Safety guard them well—
    A green grasshopper’s jump might break the shell.

The other objects of nature that delighted the peasants, and were
poetised by Clare were ants, clover blossoms, and perhaps an early
butterfly.  Again, we find an intimacy with the furry animals of the
commons.—

    And the little clumbling mouse
    Gnarls the dead leaves for her house.

No other poet has such a collection of insects and animals.

    The little gay moth lovely to view
    A-dancing with lily-white wings in the dew;
    He whisked o’er the water-edge flirting and airy
    And perched on the down-headed grass like a fairy.
    And there came the snail from shell peeping out,
    As cautious and fearful as thieves in the rout.
    The sly jumping frog, too, had ventured to ramp,
    And the glow-worm had just ’gun to light up his lamp.

Thus we can get an idea of the country life from the love poems, which
showed the tender emotional love-life of the laborer, in spite of his
mental poverty and material hardships.  Likewise, in the nature poems,
the poet shows the beauties of nature in the country.  The peasant
delighted in these beauties; he is rich in poetic sentiments and intimate
observations, though he is poor—if we judge poverty to be a lack of food
and clothing.  If the Poet had any resentment of the social and economic
situation, we should expect to find it in the poems dealing with Social
Life.

Crabbe’s lines in the “Village”, that describe a boy fainting in the
fields from exhaustion, are memorable.  Such lines might have come aptly
from Clare, who as a laborer, fainted from exhaustion and hunger, and
often went without food.  These lines of Crabbe’s are exactly descriptive
of the miseries of the poor, as experienced by Clare himself.—

    He strives to join his fellows in the field,
    Till long-contending nature droops at last.
    Declining health rejects the poor repast.
    His cheerless spouse the coming anger sees,
    And mutual murmurs urge the slow disease.

However we never find a trace of bitterness in the poems of social life
written by Clare.  Instead, he describes the hay-making time in this
manner:

    And meadows, they are mad with noise
    Of laughing maids and shouting boys,
    Making up the withering hay
    With merry hearts as light as play.

All his life the poet longed for a spot of ground of his own; but
enclosures made this an impossibility.  Yet, when Clare wrote about
enclosures, it is not about a personal wrong or injustice that he speaks;
but about the loss of beauty or of something dear to his heart that had
been, but now was gone.

    Whenever I must along the Plain,
    And mark where once they grew,
    Remembrance wakes her busy train,
    And brings past scenes to view.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    The green’s gone, too—ah, lovely scene!
    No more the kingcup gay
    Shall shine in yellow o’er the green.
    And shed its golden ray;
    No more the herdsman’s early call
    Shall bring the cows to feed;
    No more the milk-maid’s evening brawl
    In “Come Mull” tones succeed.

    Both milk-maid’s shouts and herdsman’s call
    Have vanished from the green;
    The kingcup’s yellow, shade and all,
    Shall never more be seen;
    But the thick-cultur’d tribe that grow
    Will so efface the scene,
    That aftertime will hardly know
    It ever was a green.

In this same connection, in the “Village Minstrel,” we find these lines
lamenting the absence of old scenes and objects of beauty that are gone.—

    There once were springs, when daisies’ silver studs
    Like sheets of snow on every pasture spread;
    There once were summers where the crow-flower buds
    Like golden sunbeams that sheltered Lubin’s head;
    There fallen trees the naked moors bewail,
    And scarce a bush is left to the tell the mournful tale.

Although the poet never wrote to reform agricultural conditions, he is
often realistic.  He even denounces them occasionally, but his prevailing
tone is lamentation—for the passing of the meadow-blooms and
pasture-flowers—for the trimmed hedge-fences and well-kept lawns.

    Enclosures came and every path was stopt.
    Each tyrant fix’d his sign where paths were found
    To hint a trespass who might cross the ground.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    But who can tell the anguish of his mind,
    When reformation’s formidable foes
    With civil wars ’gainst nature’s peace combined,
    And desolation struck her deadly blows
    As curst improvement ’gan his fields inclose;
    Oh greens, and fields, and trees, farewell, farewell!
    His heart-wrung pains, his unavailing woes
    No words can utter, and no tongue can tell,
    When ploughs destroy’d the green, when groves of willow fell.

Clare sees the hut of clay where the widow lives; he sees the poor house,
and feels the sting that must be the feeling of the pauper when he
accepts charity from the parish.

    Yon parish-hut, where want is shov’d to die,
    He never views them but his tear would start;
    He passed not by the doors without a sigh,
    And felt for every woe of work-house misery.

Neither does the old dame at the parish cottage, as she stands in the
door viewing the children play, and remembering her past youth—neither
does she escape the poet’s eye.

    She turns from echoes of her younger years
    And nips the portion of her snuff with tears.

The poet sees another old woman gathering cress, to make a savory salad
for Luxury’s whim.  For her labor the old woman will get a penny and a
frown.  These objects of nature were just as natural for Clare to write
about, as the brown leaves falling in the autumn instead of the green
leaves coming out in the spring.  The dismal as well as the sunny days,
the joys as well as the sorrows, he shews in his picture of the country
life.

However realistic the poet may be, he is dominated by his artistic
purpose; and for this purpose he chose scenes in the country that amused
or aroused tender emotions in him.  He shunned, perhaps sub-consciously,
the things that brought up feelings of there being injustice in the
world.  His peasants never lack enough food, or some kind of a hut that
they call home.  In the wood-cutter’s cabin the “careful wife displays
her frugal hoard, and both partake in comfort though they are poor.”  His
country laborer, working on some enclosed farm, is a religious man, not
the drunken ignorant peasant who spends his few pennies at some tavern
while his wife and children starve.  This laborer, Clare depicts going
out with his children on a Sunday afternoon.

    And often takes his family abroad
    On short excursions o’er the fields and plain
    Making each object on the road
    An insect, spring of grass, or ear of grain;
    Endeavoring thus most simply to maintain
    That the same power that bids the mite to crawl
    That browns the wheat-land in its summer stain,
    That power which formed the simple flower withal,
    Formed all that lives and grows upon this earthly ball.

Clare writes that his purpose is not to lament the sorrows but to show
the joys; and we may take the dominant motive of the poet from the
following lines:

    But useless naming what distress reveals,
    As every child of want feels all that Lubin feels.

In accordance with this purpose, in the “Village Minstrel”, his longest
poem, he gives us a variegated picture of idyllic country life.

In the Spring the country hums with new life.  On his way to plow the
fields, the peasant feels the Spring-time in the air; the birds sing
merrily as they build their nests; the blue-meadow-daisy peeps farther
out from the grass; while the white lambs grazing on the green commons
look like the last remnants of the winter’s snow.  The milk-maid hums a
love song as she weaves a garland to crown the first returning cow.  The
housewives gossip about the hens and the geese; while on Sunday after
church the men talk about the good and the bad signs of the weather for
the growing grain.

Then the Spring passes into summer, with its gentle, quiet breezes.  A
droning insect disturbed by a shrill sound of the hay-maker’s scythe
ceases for a moment his course; a butterfly rests on a stalk and is
swayed to and fro by the breeze.  The laborer, returning home in the long
summer twilight, remembers the ghost stories told the past winter; and as
the night comes on he hears the swashing sound of the drowned Amy’s
boots.  Mid-summer is ushered in with its feast, and every heart is
jumping with joy.  In brand-new clothes the swain goes to the place of
merriment, eager to meet his sun-tanned lass.  The woodsman and the
thresher, children and kin from the neighboring village, are all present.
At the cotter’s house, Joe tunes his fiddle for the dance.  When the
fiddler is paid, the place is cleared for the merry games that follow the
feast.

    Great sport for them was jumping in a sack,
    For beaver hat bedecked in ribbons blue;
    Soon one jumps down though he’s broke his neck
    And tries to rise and wondrous sport they make,
    And monstrous fun it makes to hunt the pig;
    As soapt and larded through the crowd he flies.
                   . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    And badger-baiting here, and fighting cocks—
    And wrestlers join to tug each other down.

At night the men go to the ale-house to drink, smoke, and make merry
until the money’s all gone.

    Resolv’d to keep it merry while it’s here
    As toil comes every day and feasts but once a year.

Autumn, with corn gleanings and merry tales, brings its joy and feasts.
As the old women gather the last of the harvest, they get over-heated.
Stopping to catch their breath, they amuse the children with stories or
Jack the Giant-Killer, Cincerilla, and Thumbs.  When the harvest work is
done, another feast, known as the Harvest-Supper, follows.  Beer,
smoking, and harmless pranks usher out the season of mists and mellow
fruitfulness.

Autumn breezes turn into sharper and more stinging blasts; the moors and
leas grow bare; the trees are stript of leaves; winter is come.  Though
sombre and desolate, the peasant delights in watching the storm, as great
clouds float faster and faster as the wind drives them before it.  The
woodsman, returning home on a winter night with a load of fire-wood,
looks like a moving snow-bank.  The supper is ready stewing on the hook;
the children, bright-eyed with happiness, prattle about his knees to
welcome him home.  After supper with the hearth swept clean, stories,
songs, and prayer end the day.

           “And thus in wedlock’s joy the laborer drowns his care.”




BIBLIOGRAPHY


1.  Cunningham, Wm. “Growth of English Industry and Commerce.”  3 vols.
3d.  1907.

  Vol. 1.  Early and Middle Ages.

  Vol. 2.  Mercantile System.

  Vol. 3.  Laissez Faire.

2.  Gibbens, H de B. “Industrial History of England,” ed. 1895.

3.  Johnson, A. W. “Disappearance of the Small Landowner.” ed. 1901.

4.  Hammond, J. H. and Barbara.  “The English Village” ed. 1914.

5.  Martin, Frederick, “Life of John Clare,” ed. 1865.

6.  Cherry, J. L. “Life and Remains of John Clare.” ed. 1872.

                                * * * * *

7.  Clare, John.  “Village Minstrel.” vol. I & II. ed. 1822.

8.  Symons, Arthur.  “Poems by John Clare.” ed. 1909.

9.  Gale, Norman.  “Poems by John Clare.” ed. 1901.




FOOTNOTES.


{15}  Clare’s Poems: Ed. Gale, pp. 36.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COUNTRY LIFE IN THE POETRY OF JOHN
CLARE***


******* This file should be named 53860-0.txt or 53860-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/3/8/6/53860


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

